RenAIssance_Transformer_OCR_Utsav_Rai/code/README.md, before:

# Transformer OCR Fine-Tuning and Inference

This directory contains scripts for fine-tuning the [TrOCR](https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.10282) model for Optical Character Recognition (OCR) on custom datasets and performing inference using the fine-tuned model. The TrOCR model is a Transformer-based model from Hugging Face's `transformers` library.

## Table of Contents

- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Training](#training)
- [Inference](#inference)
- [Files Description](#files-description)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

## Configuration

All hyperparameters and configuration settings are stored in `config.yaml`. Edit this file to change paths, hyperparameters, and other settings.

```yaml
# config.yaml

image_dir: '../data/train/All_line_segments'
text_dir: '../data/train/All_line_texts'
model_dir: '../models/custom'
inf_model_dir: '../weights/printed_large'
base_dir: '../data/test'
train_batch_size: 4 # batch size of 4 requires 16 GB of GPU memory, this is per device batch size so for 2 GPU devices it will be 4 batch size each, in total 8
eval_batch_size: 4
fp16: False
gradient_accumulation_steps: 1
num_train_epochs: 5
max_grad_norm: 1.0
logging_dir: './logs'
logging_steps: 10
evaluation_strategy: "steps"
eval_steps: 200
save_steps: 100000
warmup_steps: 500
weight_decay: 0.01
save_total_limit: 1
load_best_model_at_end: True
learning_rate: 5e-6
early_stopping_patience: 3
early_stopping_threshold: 0.0
wandb_project: "trocr-ocr-finetuning"
wandb_key: "Your-wandb-key"
use_wandb: False # switch to true and replace the wandb api key above
model_name: "microsoft/trocr-large-printed"
# model_name: "microsoft/trocr-large-handwritten"

```

## Training

To fine-tune the TrOCR model, use `train.py`. This script will train the model on your dataset and save the fine-tuned model to the specified directory.

### Steps for Training:

1. Ensure your dataset is organized with images and corresponding text files.
2. Update `config.yaml` with the correct paths and settings.
3. Run the training script:
   ```bash
   python train.py
   ```

## Inference

**Note**: Make sure the `inf_model_dir` in `config.yaml` is pointing to the newly finetuned model in models directory or the provided model in weights directory.

To perform inference using the fine-tuned model, use `test.py`. This script will generate text from images in the test dataset and save the results.

### Steps for Inference:

1. Ensure the fine-tuned model is saved in the directory specified in `config.yaml`.
2. Update `config.yaml` with the correct paths and settings for inference.
3. Run the inference script:
   ```bash
   python test.py
   ```

## Files Description

### `config.yaml`

This file contains all the configuration settings required for training and inference. It includes paths to datasets, model directories, hyperparameters for training, and settings for logging and evaluation.

### `train.py`

This script is used for fine-tuning the TrOCR model. It:
- Loads configuration settings.
- Initializes the processor and model.
- Prepares the dataset and data loaders.
- Sets up training arguments, optimizer, and scheduler.
- Trains the model and saves the best-performing model.
- Logs training progress and plots metrics.
- Optionally uses Weights & Biases (wandb) for experiment tracking.

### `test.py`

This script is used for performing inference with the fine-tuned model. It:
- Loads the configuration settings.
- Initializes the processor and model.
- Iterates through the test dataset to generate text from images.
- Saves the generated text to output files.

### `utils.py`

This file contains utility functions and classes, including:
- `SpanishDocumentsDataset`: A custom dataset class for loading image-text pairs.
- `collate_fn`: A function for collating batches of data.
- `compute_metrics`: A function for computing evaluation metrics (CER, WER, BLEU).
- `plot_metrics`: A function for plotting training and evaluation metrics.
- `generate_text_from_image_segment`: A function for generating text from a single image segment.
- `sort_key`: A function for sorting filenames based on numeric values.

### `datautils`

Please refer to rthe eadme provided in this directory

### `CRAFT`

Text detection model by [CRAFT: Character-Region Awareness For Text detection](https://github.com/clovaai/CRAFT-pytorch)

### `finetuning`

This directory contains several examples of finetuning trocr model and epirical findings relevant to achieve higher accuracy.  
## Usage

### Training the Model

1. Make sure your dataset is organized with images and corresponding text files.
2. Update `config.yaml` with the correct paths and settings.
3. Run the training script:
   ```bash
   python train.py
   ```

### Running Inference

1. Ensure the fine-tuned model is saved in the directory specified in `config.yaml`.
2. Update `config.yaml` with the correct paths and settings for inference.
3. Run the inference script:
   ```bash
   python test.py
   ```

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please fork the repository and submit a pull request with your changes. For major changes, please open an issue first to discuss what you would like to change.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

Add quantization, finetune and synthetic data generation

RenAIssance_Transformer_OCR_Utsav_Rai/code/README.md, after:

# Transformer OCR Fine-Tuning and Inference

This directory contains scripts for fine-tuning the [TrOCR](https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.10282) model for Optical Character Recognition (OCR) on custom datasets and performing inference using the fine-tuned model. The TrOCR model is a Transformer-based model from Hugging Face's `transformers` library.

## Table of Contents

- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Training](#training)
- [Inference](#inference)
- [Files Description](#files-description)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

## Configuration

All hyperparameters and configuration settings are stored in `config.yaml`. Edit this file to change paths, hyperparameters, and other settings.

```yaml
# config.yaml

image_dir: '../data/train/All_line_segments'
text_dir: '../data/train/All_line_texts'
model_dir: '../models/custom'
inf_model_dir: '../weights/printed_large'
base_dir: '../data/test'
train_batch_size: 4 # batch size of 4 requires 16 GB of GPU memory, this is per device batch size so for 2 GPU devices it will be 4 batch size each, in total 8
eval_batch_size: 4
fp16: False
gradient_accumulation_steps: 1
num_train_epochs: 5
max_grad_norm: 1.0
logging_dir: './logs'
logging_steps: 10
evaluation_strategy: "steps"
eval_steps: 200
save_steps: 100000
warmup_steps: 500
weight_decay: 0.01
save_total_limit: 1
load_best_model_at_end: True
learning_rate: 5e-6
early_stopping_patience: 3
early_stopping_threshold: 0.0
wandb_project: "trocr-ocr-finetuning"
wandb_key: "Your-wandb-key"
use_wandb: False # switch to true and replace the wandb api key above
model_name: "microsoft/trocr-large-printed"
# model_name: "microsoft/trocr-large-handwritten"

```

## Training

To fine-tune the TrOCR model, use `train.py`. This script will train the model on your dataset and save the fine-tuned model to the specified directory.

### Steps for Training:

1. Ensure your dataset is organized with images and corresponding text files.
2. Update `config.yaml` with the correct paths and settings.
3. Run the training script:
   ```bash
   python train.py
   ```

## Inference

**Note**: Make sure the `inf_model_dir` in `config.yaml` is pointing to the newly finetuned model in models directory or the provided model in weights directory.

To perform inference using the fine-tuned model, use `test.py`. This script will generate text from images in the test dataset and save the results.

### Steps for Inference:

1. Ensure the fine-tuned model is saved in the directory specified in `config.yaml`.
2. Update `config.yaml` with the correct paths and settings for inference.
3. Run the inference script:
   ```bash
   python test.py
   ```
## Quantization

The `quantization` folder provides scripts for quantizing the TrOCR model using ONNX and evaluating the quantized model's accuracy and performance. The quantization process reduces model size and improves inference speed with minimal impact on accuracy.

- **Quantization Script:**  
  Use `quantization/onnx_quat.py` to convert the fine-tuned PyTorch model to ONNX format and apply dynamic quantization. The script also compares inference speed and storage requirements before and after quantization.

- **Evaluation Script:**  
  Use `quantization/evaluate_quat.py` to evaluate the quantized model against the original PyTorch model. This script computes metrics such as Character Error Rate (CER), Word Error Rate (WER), and inference time, and generates visualizations for comparison.

Refer to the scripts in the `quantization/` directory for detailed usage and results.

---

## Synthetic Data Generation

The `synthetic_data_generation` directory leverages [VRD-image-text-generator](https://github.com/v-laurent/VRD-image-text-generator) to create synthetic image-text pairs for OCR training.

- **Script:**  
  The main script is `synthetic_data_generation/VRD-image-text-generator/auto_generation.py`.

- **Generating Synthetic Images:**  
  To generate synthetic images from existing text files, use the following command:
  ```bash
  python auto_generation.py --input_file your_text_file.txt --font_size 24 --add_random_text True --apply_data_augmentation True
  ```
  This will create paired images and text files in the output directories.

See the script and its command-line options for more details on customizing the synthetic data generation

## Files Description

### `config.yaml`

This file contains all the configuration settings required for training and inference. It includes paths to datasets, model directories, hyperparameters for training, and settings for logging and evaluation.

### `train.py`

This script is used for fine-tuning the TrOCR model. It:
- Loads configuration settings.
- Initializes the processor and model.
- Prepares the dataset and data loaders.
- Sets up training arguments, optimizer, and scheduler.
- Trains the model and saves the best-performing model.
- Logs training progress and plots metrics.
- Optionally uses Weights & Biases (wandb) for experiment tracking.

### `test.py`

This script is used for performing inference with the fine-tuned model. It:
- Loads the configuration settings.
- Initializes the processor and model.
- Iterates through the test dataset to generate text from images.
- Saves the generated text to output files.

### `utils.py`

This file contains utility functions and classes, including:
- `SpanishDocumentsDataset`: A custom dataset class for loading image-text pairs.
- `collate_fn`: A function for collating batches of data.
- `compute_metrics`: A function for computing evaluation metrics (CER, WER, BLEU).
- `plot_metrics`: A function for plotting training and evaluation metrics.
- `generate_text_from_image_segment`: A function for generating text from a single image segment.
- `sort_key`: A function for sorting filenames based on numeric values.

### `datautils`

Please refer to rthe eadme provided in this directory

### `CRAFT`

Text detection model by [CRAFT: Character-Region Awareness For Text detection](https://github.com/clovaai/CRAFT-pytorch)

### `finetuning`

This directory contains several examples of finetuning trocr model and epirical findings relevant to achieve higher accuracy.  
## Usage

### Training the Model

1. Make sure your dataset is organized with images and corresponding text files.
2. Update `config.yaml` with the correct paths and settings.
3. Run the training script:
   ```bash
   python train.py
   ```

### Running Inference

1. Ensure the fine-tuned model is saved in the directory specified in `config.yaml`.
2. Update `config.yaml` with the correct paths and settings for inference.
3. Run the inference script:
   ```bash
   python test.py
   ```

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please fork the repository and submit a pull request with your changes. For major changes, please open an issue first to discuss what you would like to change.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
